Support preemption while borrowing [KEP] (#1405)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/1337-preempt-within-cohort-while-borrowing/README.md

ClusterQueue. Jobs sent to the `Standard` ClusterQueues should not be preempted.
Jobs in the `Best-Effort` ClusterQueues can be preempted with respect to
priorities.

Note that in this setup every workload is borrowing, so I need to make preemption
while borrowing enabled. Additionally, I need a mechanism to say that workloads
from the `Standard` ClusterQueues are not preempted. A mechanism to only preempt
jobs with priorities below a specified threshold will suffice.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Flopping between preempting pair of workloads

In a setup as described in (Story 1)[#story-1] consider there are two workloads,
one in ClusterQueue A, and one in ClusterQueue B. There is not enough resources
in the cohort to run both workloads at the same time.

If the preemption is allowed for workloads of any priorities
(as when `.preemption.reclaimWithinCohort` equals `Any`)

> then the following flopping happens: workload A preempts workload B, then p

Author: done

preempted workload B returns to the queue and preempts workload A to make progress.
This repeats, and none of the workloads can make any progress.

In order to mitigate this risk we only enable the preemption to reclaim
quota within cohort, for workloads requiring borrowing when such preempted
workloads are of lower priority. This behavior is enabled by setting
`.preemption.borrowWithinCohort.policy: LowerPriority`.

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

### API

```golang
// ClusterQueuePreemption contains policies to preempt Workloads from this
// ClusterQueue or the ClusterQueue's cohort.
type ClusterQueuePreemption struct {
  ...
	// borrowWithinCohort provides configuration to allow preemption within
	// cohort while borrowing. This configuration can only be enabled when

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Author: I don't think we can make `ReclaimWithinCohort` a pointer, this is an API breaking change.

Second, if a user sets `borrowWithinCohort: LowerPriority`, then we would need to assume `reclaimWithinCohort: LowerPriority`. It makes sense, but I think we could also support setting `reclaimWithinCohort: Any`, while `borrowWithinCohort: LowerPriority`. This means allow for preemption in cohort for any priority workloads, if the preemptor is not borrowing, but only preempt lower-priority workloads if the preemptor is borrowing.

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Reviewer: > I don't think we can make ReclaimWithinCohort a pointer, this is an API breaking change.

IIUC, if we make `reclaimWithinCohort` a pointer, the CRD wouldn't be changed. So, we keep having backward compatibility. Maybe I discussed a similar situation with @alculquicondor. @alculquicondor If I don't understand correctly, please let me know.

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Reviewer 2: Transitioning to a pointer is somewhat backwards compatible (the yaml API doesn't change). But if there's someone that is using the golang types, they will be broken. So we should prefer not to change the types.
I think in the past we chose to change one type because it was impossible to achieve the needed semantics otherwise. In this case, the semantics could be achieved using `Never`.

However, I agree with @mimowo in that setting both policies makes sense.

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Author: I don't think we want to use: `reclaimWithinCohort: Never` combined with `borrowWithinCohort.Policy: LowerPriority`. This would mean you can preempt in other ClusterQueues, but only if you are borrowing. I don't think this is particularly useful, I opt to reject this combination by validation.

I think the only options to make sense are:
1.  `reclaimWithinCohort: LowerPriority`, and `borrowWithinCohort.Policy: LowerPriority`; meaning you can reclaim quota from workloads in the cohort of LowerPriority, same if you are borrowing.
2.  `reclaimWithinCohort: Any`, and `borrowWithinCohort.Policy: LowerPriority`; meaning you can reclaim quota from workloads in the cohort of Any priority, however, only from lower priority workloads, if you are borrowing.

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Author: Looking at the implementation it is easier to support only 1, then we can just reject the higher priority workloads during findCandidates. Maybe that is enough in the first iteration of the feature? WDYT @alculquicondor @tenzen-y ?

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Reviewer: > Maybe that is enough in the first iteration of the feature? 

I agree with you.

Thanks for clarifying this @alculquicondor @mimowo 
This makes sense.

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Reviewer: @mimowo Could you mention that we don't work on an opt `2` in the first iteration like this?

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/1284-cluster-queue-stop#notesconstraintscaveats

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Author: I will want to support opt 2 from day 1. This is what my current implementation does. I was just hesitant for a moment that without opt 2 it is easier, but as mentioned here the solution isn't really any different https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1405#discussion_r1429947701

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Author: I suggest that if we decide for whatever reason during review of the implementation that it is complicated to support, then maybe we can drop the support and update KEP later.

> 	// reclaimWithinCohort is not `Never`.

Reviewer 2: SGT

	BorrowWithinCohort *BorrowWithinCohort `json:"borrowWithinCohort,omitempty"`
  ...
}

type BorrowWithinCohortPolicy string

const (
	BorrowWithinCohortPolicyNever         BorrowWithinCohortPolicy = "Never"
	BorrowWithinCohortPolicyLowerPriority BorrowWithinCohortPolicy = "LowerPriority"
)

// BorrowWithinCohort contains configuration which allows to preempt workloads
// within cohort while borrowing.
type BorrowWithinCohort struct {
	// policy determines the policy for preemption to reclaim quota within cohort while borrowing.
	// Possible values are:
	// - `Never` (default): do not reclaim quota within ClusterQueue while borrowing.

> 	// - `LowerPriority`: allow preempting workloads to reclaim quota within the cohort,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// - `LowerPriority`: allow preempting workloads to borrow within the cohort,
```

Author: Rephrased. PTAL

	//    but only by preempting lower-priority workloads.
	//
	// +kubebuilder:default=Never
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Never;LowerPriority
	Policy BorrowWithinCohortPolicy `json:"policy,omitempty"`

	// maxPriorityThreshold allows to restrict the set of workloads for preemption

> 	// to reclaim quota within the cohort, to only workloads with priority below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// to borrow within the cohort, to only workloads with priority below
```

Author: Rephrased, PTAL

	// or equal the specified level.
	//
	// +optional

> 	MaxPriorityThreshold *int32 `json:"maxPriorityThreshold,omitempty"`

Author: ```suggestion
	BelowPriority *int32 `json:"belowPriority,omitempty"`
```
WDYT @alculquicondor @tenzen-y @yaroslava-serdiuk ?
Shorter, also, it makes it "sharp" inequality, so I can in simply code check: `priority(candidate) < min(belowPriority, priority(preemptor))`, because `LowerPriority` is also sharp.

Author: Yeah, I think `MaxPriorityThreshold` makes sense, and we should not make API decisions just based on the implementation.

Author: But just to be clear this feature is about combination of `preemption` and `borrowing`. It enables preempting workloads even for borrowing workloads.

Reviewer: > But just to be clear this feature is about combination of preemption and borrowing. It enables preempting workloads even for a borrowing workload.

That's right. I wanted to say that mixed semantics would be possible to cause confusion. It might be caused confusion to use some phrases having the aspect of preemption in `borrowWithinCohort` since we declare `borrow`.

Actually, I was confused phrase, `BorrowWithinCohort` in `ClusterQueuePreemption`. However, I couldn't find a better API name instead of `BorrowWithinCohort`.

Author: I see, I initially wanted to do `ReclaimWithinCohortConfig` like here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/53c6c54d77ca25b92720720e5417b42bc942abc8/keps/1337-preempt-within-cohort-while-borrowing/README.md#reclaimwithincohortconfig. But it is not ideal anyway, and lenghty.

Reviewer 2: Note that this new `borrowWithinCohort` field is inside the `ClusterQueuePreemption` field, so it is directly related to preemption.

`maxPriorityThreshold` has `<=` semantics. I don't think the name has any problems and the implementation is not significantly harder than the alternative.

}
```

### Implementation overview

There are main modifications:
- in the [`fitsResourceQuota`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/main/pkg/scheduler/flavorassigner/flavorassigner.go#L551)

>   we return `FlavorFungibilityPolicy.Preempt` when the workload does not fit, but

Reviewer: > we return `FlavorFungibilityPolicy.Preempt`

Does this mean `FlavorAssignmentMode=Preempt`?

Author: Yes, this is what I meant, let me clarify
